Problem Statement

This assignment is about representation learning using variants of autoencoders.  Use 1) the CIFAR10 dataset provided in Keras, after conversion to gray-level images, and 2) the MNIST handwritten gray-scale database! Rescale the datasets so that both contain 28x28 images, and normalize the intensity levels of datasets between 50 and 200. Use randomly selected 70% of the dataset as training set,  20% as the validation, and 10% as test data.

Task 1: Perform standard PCA with 70% of the training dataset and identify principal components associated with top 30 eigenvalues (for the two datasets). Use these, train a logistic regression classifier to classify the images into 10 classes for each test dataset. Draw the ROC curve for the test dataset. Repeat the same with randomized PCA and compare. Also calculate the average signal-to-noise ratio in dB of reconstructed test images w.r.t. respective test images for each dataset.   [3 marks]

Task 2: Train a single layer autoencoder with 30 nodes with linear activation function and appropriately mean and variance normalized input with constraint that encoder weight matrix and decoder weight matrix are transpose w.r.t. each other and each weight vector has unit magnitude. Compare the eigenvectors obtained in step 1 with those obtained using the autoencoders by clearly displaying  the eigenvectors in Task 1 and weight matrix obtained in Task 2 as gray scale images. Comment on the relationship between these quantitatively. Also train logistic regression classified with the auto-encoded features and compare results with those obtained in step 1 for each dataset [3 marks]

Task 3: Design and train an appropriate deep convolutional autoencoder with 30 dimensional latent space. Calculate the average SNR of reconstructed images for each test datasets and compare that with a single hidden layer 30 node autoencoder (with sigmoid activation at the autoencoder and linear at the decoder) for the test datasets. What will be the average SNR for each datasets if the hidden nodes are distributed equally among 3 hidden layers in a 3 hidden layer autoencoder with sigmoid activation at the autoencoder and linear at the decoder final layer? [4 marks]